this is the second Q&A session I've ever
done by a patreon I'm gonna try to
address two questions or questions from
two people out of the nearly infinite
number of questions have got here coming
to you from could Ming China we're gonna
try to do this in just a few minutes
this is not gonna be too too lengthy I
got one question from Christophe
Christophe are and this is not directly
related to veganism but indirectly it's
the type of ethical question vegans ask
about he says you mentioned doing
research on working conditions in
third-world factories which is true I
have done research of that kind
he then kind of misrepresents what I
have to say about it so I'm not gonna
read that part out you know it's
well-intentioned but he either didn't
get my point or he didn't really
remember what I had to say on the stuff
it's cool so he asked what is your
opinion on fair trade products and he
mentions that every so often there are
news reports showing horrible conditions
in sweatshops and factories etc okay so
point one is this is not a vegan issue
this is outside of veganism I have
talked about my channel and I have done
research into it and so obviously it's
great there are all kinds of ethical
issues we got to talk about that have
nothing to veganism like war war has a
lot of important ethical questions
attached to it but you know you want to
talk about the war in Afghanistan right
now it's not a vegan issue veganism has
no position one way or the other
however obviously vegans should think
about it engage with it what do you
think about Isis what do you think about
Syria what do you think about Russian
occupation of Ukrainian territory this
is completely irrelevant to veganism but
very important ethical and political
questions so that's the first thing yeah
the second thing is you know nothing
else is real research there is no
substitute for actually going up and
doing the research yourself and yeah my
research did actually involve visiting
some of the factories and one of the
inherent biases in the mass media such
as a TV news show is that they are only
going to show you the most salacious
examples because that's what makes a
good news story so within the same
city if there were 300 factories and 280
of them have normal or boring conditions
but they found just a couple where the
conditions are terrible
guess what film footage is gonna be on
the news that night now of course
doesn't mean I hate the news media is
great sure go out get a camera I mean
yeah we do that it's peakins also so if
we if we sent out film crews to ten
different slaughterhouses what what
footage are we gonna use are we gonna
use the best footage are we gonna have a
representative study of the full range
of slaughterhouse conditions of the full
range of even farm and dairy conditions
no as vegans we select the worst most
horrible most horrifying footage and
some meteors and farmers do complain
about that they say look this is not
representative and in response vegans
can basically we're not even trying to
be representative we're not trying to
give you you know a full spectrum view
we're not trying to break down what
percentage of farms use these methods
and what use those methods you know with
the slaughterhouse footage we're just
giving you shocking glimpses of some of
the worst conditions that we have
footage of and if you'll have to say I'm
vegan I I support that but yes it's it's
propaganda of a kind and yes what the
mainstream news media does with factory
conditions is propaganda of a kind
whether or not they they intended to be
a general I think they do intend it to
be I think they just want to have a
salacious story on the six o'clock news
and they're not interested in doing a
lifecycle analysis of what life is like
for the employees or of the variety of
conditions that exist in factories and
if what the factors are that separate so
why are some factories worse than others
there are real answers to those
questions and you can do real research
into it
but look so he says do you think that it
is immoral to buy products manufactured
in unknown conditions in the third world
that's his his final question wrapping
up his you know agonizing over this
issue why did you put third world in
there why didn't you say is it immoral
to buy products in unknown conditions
period white why third world you think
we don't have these problems in Canada
really you think we don't have problems
with exploitation of labour the United
dates in Europe really have you done
five mister you think there aren't
horrendous factory conditions within
Italy I did some readings randomly I
remember about the the factories were
purses and other high fashion items are
made in Italy gets pretty grim and
including the fact that the employees
are often illegal laborers within those
factories in Italy so then there's it's
all being conducted outside of
government oversight outside of the law
because the the employment itself is
illegal is so the real question is is it
immoral to buy something made in
conditions that are unknown to you
well it's ignorant you're acting out of
ignorance veganism choice TV news beyond
is about doing what's possible and
practicable what can you know one of the
main things you can know is the country
of origin so one of the easiest
decisions you can make is to buy goods
that are made in countries that have
elections they have democracy even if it
is a somewhat corrupt or dysfunctional
democracy Cambodia is in many ways a
terrible example of a democracy but
nevertheless when I was in Cambodia we
had labor unions we had protests we had
workers protesting to get higher wages
and they did not easy why would it be
easy and Cambodia obviously it's claims
to democracy are pretty weak it's not a
positive example of democracy but the
contrast between Cambodia and say China
is still tremendous in terms of making
an ethical decision do you want to buy
clothing made in Cambodia versus
clothing made in China there are real
differences there are differences in
transparency government accountability
the ability of workers to unionize the
ability of a Free Press to go and
investigate and report on conditions in
in factories so on that level yes you
can make the decision to buy clothing
made in countries where you know the
workers will have some of those rights
now does that mean they all enjoy those
rights no does that mean is this a
perfect solution no but in terms of
what's
impracticable choosing the country of
origin carefully is probably the real
difference you can make in terms of
Fairtrade branding and so on if you do
five minutes of research you're gonna
find that that's a pretty weak and
corruptible system I did meet and speak
to one person who was part of that
system and who complained exactly that
it was corrupt and terrible and that
this really didn't mean anything I have
also seen some salacious news reports on
that that the Fairtrade system doesn't
work and wondering if it was designed
not to work because it so totally fails
to actually enforce any kind of ethical
standards by the way clean laundry if
you're wondering why my exciting
backdrop changes so much okay Anna s
asks are there any books journals or
articles on vegan politics vegan ethics
speaking community vegan activism is
there something worth reading and
sharing Anna asks is one of my super
heavy users on patreon think she comes
on every day and comments and responses
oh hi Anna
um no so long story short I think what's
interesting to reflect on is that the
the importance YouTube is taking on
within veganism reflects the weakness of
other media so no I do not think moving
that direction if you're looking ahead
at the next ten years do you think that
print media such as magazines are going
to be more important than veganism or
less important do you think the
important the significance of digital
media like YouTube is going to increase
or decrease for veganism now pardon me
way back in the day what ever more than
15 years ago when I was involved with
the the Green Party in Canada I really
argued passionately to them to the
leadership of that party that if they
did not develop a respectable magazine
they would never be a respectable
political party and it was quite a
strong argument at that time partly
because the Green Party in Canada relied
on sending people paper in the mail you
know ultimately the medium for the party
was to collect donations and then your
reward was you got something in the mail
so at that time I looked at magazines
like the ecologist again 15 years ago I
don't know maybe it's a terrible
magazine now I saw only a couple issues
of that but that was a magazine
that had very science driven articles
talking about ecological disasters but
also for instance they would have an
article talking about what are the
ingredients in suntan lotion and what
are the real effects in your health of
these chemicals that are in suntan
lotion mmm I look to something like that
and I said look if the Green Party can
have scientifically respectable well
researched articles with a good
editorial process then you can build
trust in the constituency the donors the
people who support the party then you
can start to be taken seriously for
having informed opinions about
ecological disasters or events within
Canada you can show you have some
capacity for active research and you can
be taken seriously by your own
supporters maybe eventually by the
mainstream press by the public at large
so at that time I was really insisting
on the importance of their developing
their their print media capability
because they were publishing stuff on
paper it was just garbage you know
they'd publish a you know like a
newsletter but all it said was donate
money to the Green Party we promise
we're gonna save the world
there was no substance there was no no
intellectual substance no political subs
to what have you for veganism next five
years
no veganism as a broad tenth veganism as
a whole I do not think it's moving
towards print media at all I think what
currently exists on paper is garbage I
think the only real books that come out
that people read connected to veganism
are celebrity driven books guys like
Jorge mumble we're already famous or you
know a famous singer famous actor famous
athlete becomes vegan they may publish a
book on veganism and that may be written
about in magazine articles but no I mean
the whole the whole print media world is
very weak for veganism as a broad tent
however something I discussed towards
the end of my my interview with the
light twins on the other hand you could
have vital and meaningful print media
for smaller circles within veganism I've
said several times be wonderful to get
organized just vegan scientists or even
just vegans doing research in the health
sciences and the life sciences because
of the connection to vivisection and
animal testing those issues so could you
have a print media publication to give a
voice for
people yes and those people would
probably be highly motivated to
contribute to a magazine or journal of
that kind and to see it have high
editorial standards so when you have a
specific profession vegans within that
profession sure you could have a great
journal or great magazine
probably vegan restaurant ters vegan
franchise owners people who run
restaurants who make money at a vegan
food probably they could have an
industry publication probably very
successful but I mean almost anything
vegan architects you know veganism is
related to architecture really you could
probably have specialized publications
where there's enough interest and
passion within one profession with those
people a lot in common to make paper
publication work or obviously if you
actually have a political party like the
Green Party that could work but no for
veganism as a as a big tent I don't
think that's the direction we're moving
in at all and for me that reflects the
fundamental fact that veganism is
internally fractious fragmentary
divisive and divided and it's gonna stay
that way
it's gonna remain a beautiful
cacophonous mixture of left-wing and
right-wing and centrist and atheist and
religious and Buddhist and Hindu and Jew
and you know it's people who are vegan
for strictly ethical reasons for
ecological reasons people are vegan for
the sake of vanity or health the people
who are vegan who are really passionate
about animal rights defined as animal
rights as opposed to people who approach
it more from a climate change
perspective or saving the rainforest
perspective or and of course they're
gonna be people who are specific or
focused on specific species saving the
Bears saving the whales for that big
tent the crazy cat ladies all the way
over to the recovering an erect sex all
you people I've you know who you are
some of you talk to me everyday this you
know that diversity to try to harness
that in one magazine boosting it ain't
gonna work
whereas we do in a sense harness it here
on YouTube we get to reflect that
diversity we get to capture that
cacophony but I do hope well as moving
forward we're going to see some of those
more focused organizations within
veganism just for scientists or just for
other special interest groups okay
thanks for the questions guys I mean hey
two questions under 20 minutes